## Materials and Methods

### Identifying *de novo* germline mutations in the BXD RILs

The BXD resource currently comprises a total of 152 recombinant inbred lines (RILs). RILs were derived from either F2 or advanced intercrosses, and subsequently inbred by brother-sister mating for up to 180 generations [@PMID:33472028]. Previously, we analyzed whole-genome sequencing data from the BXDs and identified candidate *de novo* germline mutations in each line [@PMID:35545679]. A detailed description of the methods used for DNA extraction, sequencing, alignment, and variant processing, as well as the characteristics of the *de novo* mutations, are available in a previous manuscript [@PMID:35545679].

Briefly, we aligned paired-end Illumina sequencing data to the GRCm38/mm10 reference genome using the 10X LongRanger software (v2.1.6; Lariat approach), called single-nucleotide variants using GATK version (v3.8-1-0-gf15c1c3ef) [@PMID:21478889], and identified mutations in each BXD that were absent from all other RILs, as well as from the C57BL/6J and DBA/2J parents. We required each private variant to be meet the following criteria: 

* genotyped as either homozygous or heterozygous for the alternate allele, with at least 90% of sequencing reads supporting the alternate allele

* supported by at least 10 sequencing reads

* Phred-scaled genotype quality of at least 20 

* must not overlap regions of the genome annotated as segmental duplications or simple repeats in GRCm38/mm10

* must occur on a parental haplotype that was inherited by at least one other BXD at the same locus, and must be homozygous for the reference allele in those other lines

### A new approach to discover germline mutator alleles

Using the existing catalog of *de novo* germline mutations in the BXDs, we developed a new approach to discover loci that affect the germline *de novo* mutation spectrum in biparental RILs (Figure @fig:toy-diagram).

![**Overview of inter-haplotype distance method for discovering mutator alleles.** **a)** A population of four haplotypes have been genotyped at three informative markers, and each harbors a set of private *de novo* germline mutations. At each informative marker, we compute an aggregate *de novo* germline mutation spectrum in the haplotypes that carry either parental allele, and calculate the cosine distance between the two aggregate spectra. **b)** We repeat the process outlined in a) for every informative marker along the genome. **c)** To assess the significance of any cosine distance peaks in b), we perform a permutation test by shuffling the labels associated with each haplotype's mutation data and running a genome-wide distance scan. In each of $N$ permutations, we record the maximum distance encountered at any locus in the distance scan. Finally, we calculate the $1 - p$ percentile of that maximum distance distribution to obtain a genome-wide cosine distance threshold at the specified value of $p$.](images/Figure%201.png){#fig:toy-diagram width=7in} 

We assume that a collection of haplotypes has been genotyped at informative markers, and that *de novo* germline mutations have been identified on each haplotype.

We iterate over each informative marker and divide the haplotypes into two groups based on the parental allele that they inherited. We then compute a $k$-mer mutation spectrum using the aggregate mutation counts in each haplotype group. The $k$-mer mutation spectrum contains the frequency of every possible $k$-mer mutation type in a collection of mutations, and can be represented as a vector of size $6 \times 4^{k - 1}$ after collapsing by strand complement. For example, the $1$-mer mutation spectrum is 6-element vector that contains the frequencies of C>T, C>G, C>A, A>G, A>T, and A>C mutations.

At each locus, we then calculate the cosine distance between the aggregate mutation spectra of haplotypes with either parental allele. The cosine distance between two vectors $\mathbf{A}$ and $\mathbf{B}$ is defined as 

$$D_C = 1 - \frac{\mathbf{A} \cdot \mathbf{B}}{||\mathbf{A}|| \ ||\mathbf{B}||}$$

where $||\mathbf{A}||$ and $||\mathbf{B}||$ are the $L_2$ norms of $\mathbf{A}$ and $\mathbf{B}$, respectively. The cosine distance metric has a number of favorable properties for comparing mutation spectra. Since cosine distance does not take the magnitude of vectors into account, it can be used to compare two spectra with unequal total mutation counts. Additionally, by calculating the cosine distance between mutation *spectra*, we avoid the need to perform separate comparisons of mutation counts at each individual $k$-mer mutation type.

We use permutation tests to establish genome-wide cosine distance thresholds. In each of $N$ permutation trials, we randomly shuffle the per-haplotype mutation data such that haplotype labels no longer correspond to the correct mutation counts. Using the shuffled mutation data, we perform a genome-wide distance scan as described above, and record the maximum distance observed at any locus. After $N$ permutations (usually 1,000 or 10,000), we compute the $1 - p$ percentile of the maximum distance distribution, and use that percentile value as a genome-wide significance threshold (for example, at $p = 0.05$).

Additional documentation describing the distance method is available on GitHub [@url:https://github.com/quinlan-lab/proj-mutator-mapping], along with code for running the method on the BXDs or other similar datasets.

### Simulations to assess the power of the inter-haplotype distance approach

We performed a series of simple simulations to estimate our power to detect alleles that affect the germline mutation spectrum in biparental RILs.

First, we simulate the $k$-mer mutation spectrum in a population of $h$ haplotypes. We assume that 50% of the haplotypes are under the effects of a mutator allele that increases the mutation rate of a particular mutation type(s) by an effect size $e$. We simulate $m$ mutations on each haplotype by taking draws from a Poisson distribution as follows:

We first define a vector of mutation probabilities:

$$\mathbf{P} = \left( 0.4, \ 0.1, \ 0.075, \ 0.075, \ 0.075, \ 0.275 \right)$$

These probabilities sum to 1 and correspond to the expected frequencies of C>T, C>A, C>G, A>T, A>C, and A>G *de novo* germline mutations in mice, respectively [@PMID:31492841].

If we are simulating the 3-mer mutation spectrum, we define a vector of mutation probabilities of length 96, and assign every 3-mer mutation type a value of $\frac{\mathbf{P}_b}{16}$, where $\mathbf{P}_b$ is the probability of the “base” mutation type associated with the 3-mer mutation type. In other words, each of the 16 possible NCN>NTN 3-mer mutation types would be assigned a mutation probability of $\frac{0.4}{16} = 0.025$.

To simulate the mutation spectrum on each wild-type haplotype, we define a vector of lambda values by scaling the mutation probabilities by the number of mutations we wish to simulate: 

$$\lambda = \mathbf{P}m$$

and take a Poisson draw from this vector of lambda values. 

To simulate the mutation spectrum on each mutator haplotype, we multiply the mutation probability of a particular mutation type (or multiple mutation types) $\mathbf{P}_n$ by the mutator effect size $e$. When $k = 1$, we only augment the effect size of one mutation type at a time, but when $k = 3$, we augment a fraction (25%, 50%, or 100%) of the 3-mer mutation types associated with a single “base” mutation type. Then, we define the vector of lambda values by scaling the mutation probabilities by $m$ and take a Poisson draw from that vector on each haplotype.

After generating “mutator” and “wild-type” haplotypes, we randomly shuffle the simulated haplotypes $N = 10,000$ times and compute the cosine distance between wild-type and mutator haplotypes each time. If fewer than 5% of the $N$ permutations produces a cosine distance greater than or equal to the cosine distance between the "true" wild-type and mutator haplotypes, we say that the approach succesfully identified the mutator allele. For every combination of simulation parameters ($h$, $m$, $e$, and so on) we perform 100 trials and record the number of trials in which we successfully identify the mutator allele. 

### Applying the inter-haplotype distance method to the BXDs

We downloaded previously-generated BXD *de novo* germline mutation data from the GitHub repository associated with the previous manuscript, which was also archived at Zenodo [@url:https://github.com/tomsasani/bxd_mutator_manuscript;@doi:10.5281/zenodo.5941048;@PMID:35545679], and downloaded a CSV file of BXD genotypes at each of 7,320 informative markers from GeneNetwork [@url:http://gn1.genenetwork.org/dbdoc/BXDGeno.html;@PMID:27933521]. We also downloaded relevant metadata about each BXD RIL from the manuscript describing the updated BXD resource [@PMID:33472028]. 

We used Snakemake [@PMID:34035898] to write a reproducible workflow for running the inter-haplotype distance method on the BXD dataset, which has been deposited in the GitHub repository associated with this manuscript [@url:https://github.com/quinlan-lab/proj-mutator-mapping].

### Identifying candidate mutator alleles overlapping the chromosome 6 peak

We investigated the region implicated by our inter-haplotype distance approach on chromosome 6 by querying the joint-genotyped BXD VCF file (European Nucleotide Archive accession **PRJEB45429** [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/PRJEB45429]). We annotated the BXD VCF using the following `snpEff` [@PMID:22728672] command: 

```
 java -Xmx16g -jar /path/to/snpeff/jarfile GRCm38.75 /path/to/bxd/vcf > /path/to/uncompressed/output/vcf
```

and used `cyvcf2` [@PMID:28165109] to iterate over the annotated VCF file in order to identify nonsynonymous differences between the parental C57BL/6J and DBA/2J strains.

### Comparing mutation spectra between Mouse Genomes Projects strains

We downloaded mutation data from a previous analysis [@PMID:30753674] (Supplementary File 1, Excel Table S3) that identified strain-private mutations in each of 29 strains sequenced as part of the Sanger Mouse Genomes (MGP) project [@PMID:21921910]. When comparing counts of each mutation type between MGP strains that harbored either *D* or *B* alleles at the chromosome 4 or chromosome 6 mutator loci, we adjusted mutation counts by the number of callable A, T, C, or G nucleotides in each strain as described previously [@PMID:35545679].

### Querying GeneNetwork for evidence of eQTLs at the mutator locus 

We used the online GeneNetwork resource [@PMID:27933521], which contains array- and RNA-seq-derived expression measurements in a wide variety of tissues from numerous datasets, to find *cis*-eQTLs for the DNA repair genes we implicated under the cosine distance peak on chromosome 6. On the GeneNetwork homepage (genenetwork.org), we selected the "BXD Family" **Group** and used the **Type** dropdown menu to select each of the specific expression datasets described in Table @tbl:eqtl-results. In the **Get Any:** text box, we then entered the specified gene name and clicked **Search**. After selecting the appropriate data record on the next page, we used the **Mapping Tools** dropdown to run genome-wide efficient mixed model association (GEMMA) [@PMID:2453419] with the WGS-based marker genotypes and the leave-one-chromosome-out (LOCO) method to account for kinship between RILs. 