## Results

### Benchmarking the inter-haplotype distance method using simulations

We first tested the inter-haplotype distance approach using simulated data (Materials and Methods). We find that the method's power is mostly limited by the initial mutation rate of the $k$-mer mutation type affected by the mutator allele and the total number of *de novo* germline mutations in the dataset (that is, the product of the number of haplotypes and the mean number of mutations per haplotype) (Figure {@fig:simulations}). For example, given 50 haplotypes with an average of 500 *de novo* germline mutations each, our method has nearly 80% power detect a mutator allele that increases the C>T *de novo* mutation rate by 10%. However, the method only has about 30% power to detect a mutator of identical effect size that affects the C>G mutation rate, since C>G mutations are expected to make up a much smaller fraction of all *de novo* germline mutations to begin with. These simulations also demonstrate that our method is well-powered to detect large-effect mutator alleles (e.g., those that increase the mutation rate of a specific $k$-mer by 50%), even with a relatively small number of mutations per haplotype.

![**Simulations to assess the power of the inter-haplotype distance method.** We simulated *de novo* germline mutations on the specified number of haplotypes, such that 50% of haplotypes were affected by a mutator allele that increased the mutation rate of the specified $k$-mer by the specified effect size (an effect size of 1.5 indicates a 50% increase in the mutation rate). The colors of the lines indicate the number of simulated mutations on each haplotype (before augmenting the mutation rate with a mutator allele). Given a specific combination of parameters, the y-axis denotes the fraction of 100 simulations in which the simulated mutator allele could be detected at a p-value of 0.05. Shaded areas indicate the standard deviation of that fraction.](images/sims.png){#fig:simulations width=7in} 

### Re-identifying the mutator allele on chromosome 4 in the BXDs

We applied our inter-haplotype distance method to 93 BXD RILs (Materials and Methods) with a total of 62,993 *de novo* germline mutations [@PMID:35545679]. Reassuringly, using 1-mer mutation spectra, we observed a large $\chi^{2}$ statistic peak at a locus on chromosome 4 (Figure {@fig:distance-results}A; maximum adjusted $\chi^2$ statistic of 352.7 at marker ID `rs52263933`; position 116.75 Mbp in GRCm38/mm10 coordinates). We observed the same peak on chromosome 4 using the 3-mer mutation spectrum, as well (Figure @fig:distance-3mer).

![**Results of inter-haplotype distance scans in the BXD RILs.** **a)** $\chi^{2}$ statistics between aggregate 1-mer *de novo* mutation spectra on BXD haplotypes (n = 93 haplotypes; 62,993 total mutations) with either *D* or *B* alleles at 7,320 informative markers. Distance threshold at $p = 0.05$ was calculated by performing 10,000 permutations of the BXD haplotype mutation data, and is shown as a dotted grey line. **b)** $\chi^{2}$ statistics between aggregate 1-mer *de novo* mutation spectra on BXD haplotypes with *D* alleles at `rs52263933` (n = 55 haplotypes; 40,913 total mutations) and either *D* or *B* alleles at 7,320 informative markers. Distance threshold at $p = 0.05$ was calculated by performing 10,000 permutations of the BXD haplotype mutation data, and is shown as a dotted grey line. **c)** Fractions of *de novo* germline mutations in BXDs with either *D* or *B* haplotypes at markers `rs52263933` and `rs31001331`, stratified by mutation type. **d)** Fractions of *de novo* germline mutations in Sanger Mouse Genome Project (MGP) strains with either *D* or *B* haplotypes at markers `rs52263933` and `rs31001331`, stratified by mutation type.](images/Figure%202.png){#fig:distance-results width=7in} 

In a previous analysis, we used quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping to identify a nearly identical locus on chromosome 4 that was significantly associated with the C>A germline mutation rate in the BXDs [@PMID:35545679]. This locus overlaps 21 protein-coding genes that are annotated by the Gene Ontology as being involved in "DNA repair," but only one of these genes contains non-synonymous differences between the two parental strains: *Mutyh*. *Mutyh* encodes a protein involved in the base-excision repair of 8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG), a DNA lesion caused by oxidative damage, and prevents the accumulation of C>A mutations [@PMID:28551381;@PMID:28127763;@PMID:17581577]. C>A germline mutation rates are nearly 50% higher in BXDs that inherited *D* haplotypes at marker ID `rs52263933` than in those that inherited *B* haplotypes [@PMID:35545679].

### An additional germline mutator allele on chromosome 6

After confirming that the inter-haplotype distance method could recover the mutator locus overlapping *Mutyh*, we asked if our approach could identify additional mutator loci in the BXD. To account for the effects of the large-effect C>A germline mutator locus near *Mutyh*, we divided the BXD RILs into those with either *D* (n = 55) or *B* (n = 38) genotypes at `rs52263933` (the marker at which we observed the highest adjusted $\chi^{2}$ statistic on chromosome 4), and ran a genome-wide distance scan using each group separately (Figure {@fig:distance-results}B.

Using only the BXDs with *B* genotypes at the *Mutyh* mutator locus, we did not observe any genome-wide significant peaks. But using the BXDs with *D* genotypes at the same locus, we identified a $\chi^{2}$ statistic peak on chromosome 6 (Figure {@fig:distance-results}B; maximum adjusted $\chi^2$ statistic of 81.0 at marker `rs31001331`; position 114.05 Mbp in GRCm38/mm10 coordinates). We identified the same peak using the 3-mer mutation spectra (Figure @fig:distance-3mer). We queried the region underneath this peak (+/- 5 Mbp) and discovered 16 protein-coding genes that harbored nonsynonymous differences between C57BL/6J and DBA/2J. Two of these genes were also annotated with the Gene Ontology term "DNA repair": *Ogg1* and *Mbd4*. *Ogg1* encodes a key member of the base-excision repair response to oxidative DNA damage, a pathway that also includes *Mutyh*. *Mbd4* encodes a protein that is involved in the repair of G:T mismatches at methylated CpG sites that have undergone spontaneous deamination. Each of these genes harbors a single fixed nonsynonymous difference between the C57BL/6J and DBA/2J parental strains (Table @tbl:nonsyn-diffs). 

| Gene name | Ensembl transcript name | Amino acid change | Position in GRCm38/mm10 coordinates | SIFT prediction | GERP score |
| - | - | - | - | - | - |
| *Ogg1* | `ENSMUST00000032406` | p.Thr95Ala | chr6:113328510 | 0.84 (tolerant/benign) | -0.61 |
| *Mbd4* | `ENSMUST00000032469` | p.Asp129Asn | chr6:115849644 | 0.02 (intolerant/deleterious) | 3.34 |

Table: Nonsynonymous mutations in DNA repair genes near the chr6 peak.{#tbl:nonsyn-diffs}

We also considered the possibility that expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs), rather than nonsynonymous mutations, could contribute to the C>A mutator phenotype associated to the locus on chromosome 6. Using GeneNetwork [@PMID:27933521], we mapped cis-eQTLs for *Ogg1* and *Mbd4* in a number of tissues, including hematopoetic stem cells, kidney, and spleen. BXD genotypes near the $\chi^{2}$ statistic peak on chromosome 6 were significantly associated with *Ogg1* expression in some (but not all) tissues, and *D* genotypes were nearly always associated with decreased gene expression (Table @tbl:eqtl-results). We discovered one significant cis-eQTL for *Mbd4* in spleen, though *D* alleles were associated with increased expression. We also queried a previously published collection of eQTLs derived from Diversity Outbred (DO) mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) expression data [@PMID:32795400], but did not find any significant eQTLs for either *Ogg1* or *Mbd4*.

### Evidence of epistasis between germline mutator alleles

Next, we more precisely characterized the effects of the mutator alleles on chromosome 4 and 6 on mutation spectra in the BXDs. We observed that C>A germline mutation fractions in BXDs with *D* alleles at both mutator loci were higher than C>A fractions in BXDs with *D* alleles at either locus alone (Figure {@fig:distance-results}C). However, compared to BXDs with *B* alleles at the chromosome 6 mutator locus, those with *D* alleles did not exhibit higher C>A mutation fractions, indicating that the effects of the chromosome 6 mutator locus depend on the presence of a *D* allele at the chromosome 4 locus (Figure {@fig:distance-results}C). To more formally test for epistasis, we fit a linear model predicting counts of C>A mutations in each strain as a function of genotypes at `rs52263933` and `rs31001331` (the peak markers at the chr4 and chr6 mutator loci, respectively) (Materials and Methods). A model that included an interaction term between genotypes at the two markers fit the data significantly better (p = 0.00098) than a model including only additive effects of the two markers.

To explore the effects of the two mutator loci in other inbred laboratory mice, we also compared the germline mutation spectra of Sanger Mouse Genomes Project (MGP) strains. Dumont [@PMID:30753674] previously identified private germline mutations in 29 inbred laboratory strains; these private variants likely represent recent *de novo* germline mutations (Figure {@fig:distance-results}D). Only two of the MGP strains possess *D* genotypes at both the chromosome 4 and chromosome 6 mutator loci: DBA/1J and DBA/2J. As before, we tested for epistasis in the MGP strains by fitting two linear models predicting C>A mutation rates as a function of genotypes at `rs52263933` and `rs31001331`. A model incorporating an interaction term between genotypes at these loci did not fit the data significantly better than a model with additive effects alone (p = 0.174). Thus, we are unable to confirm the signal of epistasis observed in the BXDs, but this may be due to the smaller number of MGP strains with *de novo* germline mutation data.

### Only one of the candidate mutator alleles is present in wild mice 

To determine whether the candidate mutator alleles on chromosome 6 were segregating in natural populations, we queried previously published sequencing data generated from 67 wild-derived mice [@PMID:27622383]. These data include three subspecies of *Mus musculus*, as well as the outgroup *Mus spretus*. We found that the *D* allele in *Ogg1* was segregating at approximately 25% frequency in *Mus musculus domesticus*, the species from which C57BL/6J and DBA/2J derive the majority of their genomes [@PMID:17660819], and was fixed in *Mus musculus musculus*, *Mus musculus castaneus*, and the outgroup *Mus spretus*. However, the *D* allele in *Mbd4* was not present in any of the wild mice.

