## Results

### Benchmarking the inter-haplotype distance method using simulations

We first tested the inter-haplotype cosine distance approach using simulated data (Materials and Methods). We find that the method's power is mostly limited by the initial mutation rate of the $k$-mer mutation type affected by the mutator allele and the total number of *de novo* germline mutations in the dataset (that is, the product of the number of haplotypes and the mean number of mutations per haplotype) (Figure {@fig:simulations}). For example, given 50 haplotypes with an average of 500 *de novo* germline mutations each, our method has nearly 90% power detect a mutator allele that increases the C>T *de novo* mutation rate by 10%. However, the method only has about 10% power to detect a mutator of identical effect size that affects the C>G mutation rate, since C>G mutations are expected to make up a much smaller fraction of all *de novo* germline mutations to begin with. These simulations also demonstrate that our method is well-powered to detect large-effect mutator alleles (e.g., those that increase the mutation rate of a specific $k$-mer by 50%), even with a relatively small number of mutations per haplotype.

![**Simulations to assess the power of the inter-haplotype distance method.** We simulated *de novo* germline mutations on the specified number of haplotypes, such that 50% of haplotypes were affected by a mutator allele that increased the mutation rate of the specified $k$-mer by the specified effect size (an effect size of 1.5 indicates a 50% increase in the mutation rate). The colors of the lines indicate the number of simulated mutations on each haplotype (before augmenting the mutation rate with a mutator allele). Given a specific combination of parameters, the y-axis denotes the fraction of 100 simulations in which the simulated mutator allele could be detected at a p-value of 0.05. Shaded areas indicate the standard deviation of that fraction.](images/sims.png){#fig:simulations width=7in} 

### Re-identifying the mutator allele on chromosome 4 in the BXDs

We applied our inter-haplotype distance method to 94 BXD RILs (Materials and Methods) with a total of 63,914 *de novo* germline mutations [@PMID:35545679]. Reassuringly, we observed a large peak in cosine distance at a locus on chromosome 4 (Figure {@fig:distance-results}A; maximum distance of X at marker ID rsYYYYY; position 116.8 Mbp in mm10 coordinates). 

![**Results of inter-haplotype distance scans in the BXD RILs.** **a)** Cosine distances between aggregate *de novo* mutation spectra on BXD haplotypes (n = 94)with either *D* or *B* alleles at approximately 7,500 informative markers. Distance threshold at $p = 0.05$ was calculated by performing 10,000 permutations of the BXD haplotype mutation data, and is shown as a dotted grey line. One outlier RIL with an extremely high C>A mutation rate (BXD68) was removed prior to running the distance scan. **b)** Cosine distances between aggregate *de novo* mutation spectra on BXD haplotypes with either *D* or *B* alleles at approximately 7,500 informative markers. Only BXDs with *D* haplotypes at marker rsYYYY on chromosome 4 were included in the scan. Distance threshold at $p = 0.05$ was calculated by performing 10,000 permutations of the BXD haplotype mutation data, and is shown as a dotted grey line. **c)** Fractions of *de novo* germline mutations in BXDs with either *D* or *B* haplotypes at markers rsXXXX and rsYYYY. Total counts of each mutation type were aggregated in groups of BXDs with either of the four possible haplotype combinations, and fractions of each mutation type were calculated in each group separately. Chi-square tests of independence were used to compare counts of individual mutation types between the D-D and D-B groups of BXDs, as well as between the B-D and B-B groups. **d)** Fractions of *de novo* germline mutations in Sanger Mouse Genome Project (MGP) strains with either *D* or *B* haplotypes at markers rsXXXX and rsYYYY. Total counts of each mutation type were aggregated in groups of MGP strains with either of the four possible haplotype combinations, and fractions of each mutation type were calculated in each group separately. Chi-square tests of independence were used to compare counts of individual mutation types between the D-D and D-B groups of BXDs, as well as between the B-D and B-B groups.](images/Figure%202.png){#fig:distance-results width=7in} 

In a previous analysis, we used quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping to identify a nearly identical locus on chromosome 4 that was significantly associated with the C>A germline mutation rate in the BXDs [@PMID:35545679]. This locus overlaps 21 protein-coding genes that are annotated by the Gene Ontology as being involved in "DNA repair," but only one of these genes contains non-synonymous differences between the two parental strains: *Mutyh*. *Mutyh* encodes a protein involved in the base-excision repair of 8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG), a DNA lesion caused by oxidative damage, and prevents the accumulation of C>A mutations [@PMID:28551381;@PMID:28127763;@PMID:17581577]. C>A germline mutation rates are nearly 50% higher in BXDs that inherited *D* haplotypes at marker ID rsYYYY than in those that inherited *B* haplotypes [@PMID:35545679].

### An additional germline mutator allele on chromosome 6

After confirming that the inter-haplotype distance method could recover the mutator locus overlapping *Mutyh*, we asked if our approach could identify additional mutator loci in the BXD. To account for the effects of the large-effect C>A germline mutator locus near *Mutyh*, we divided the BXD RILs into those with either *D* (n = X) or *B* (n = Y) genotypes at rsYYYYY (the marker at which we observed the highest inter-haplotype cosine distance on chromosome 4), and ran a genome-wide distance scan using each group separately (Figure {@fig:distance-results}B.

Using only the BXDs with *B* genotypes at the *Mutyh* mutator locus, we did not observe any genome-wide significant peaks. But using the BXDs with *D* genotypes at the same locus, we identified a cosine distance peak on chromosome 6 (Figure {@fig:distance-results}B; maximum distance of X at marker rsYYYYY; position 133.2 Mbp in mm10 coordinates). We queried the region underneath this peak and discovered two genes annotated with the Gene Ontology term "DNA repair": *Setmar*, a protein with histone methyltransferase and transposase activity, and remarkably, *Ogg1*. The latter encodes a key member of the base-exision repair response to oxidative DNA damage, a pathway that also includes *Mutyh* and a related gene, *Mth1*. Both *Setmar* and *Ogg1* harbor fixed nonsynonymous differences between the C57BL/6J and DBA/2J parental strains (Table {@tbl:missense-diffs}). 

| Gene name | Amino acid change | Position in GRCm38/mm10 coordinates |
|----------|----------|----------|
| *Ogg1* | p.Ala95Thr | chr6: |
| *Setmar* | p.Leu103Phe | chr6: |
| *Setmar* | p.Ser273Arg | chr6: |

Table: Summary of nonsynonymous differences between C57BL/6J and DBA/2J haplotypes in DNA repair genes near the mutator locus on chromosome 6. {#tbl:missense-diffs}

We also considered the possibility that expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs), rather than nonsynonymous mutations, were responsible for the C>A mutator phenotype linked to the locus on chromosome 6. Using GeneNetwork [@PMID:27933521], we mapped eQTLs for *Ogg1* in a number of tissues, including hematopoetic stem cells, kidney, and spleen. BXD genotypes at the cosine distance peak on chromosome 6 were significantly associated with *Ogg1* expression in many tissues, and *D* genotypes were nearly always associated with decreased gene expression (Table @tbl:eqtl-results). Although we did not have access to expression data from germline tissues such as testis or ovary, these results suggest that the expression of DNA repair genes may contribute to the observed C>A mutator phenotype on chromosome 6, as well.

| Tissue name | Expression data provenance | # BXDs with expression data | cis-eQTL near peak? | -log10(p) of top marker | Additive effect of D allele on expression |
| - | - | - | - | - | - |
| Kidney | `Mouse kidney M430v2 Sex Balanced (Aug06) RMA` | 53 | Yes | 12.89 | -0.18 |
| Gastrointestinal | `UTHSC Mouse BXD Gastrointestinal Affy MoGene 1.0 ST Gene Level (Apr14) RMA` | 46 | Yes | 5.15 | -0.076 |
| Stem cells | `UMCG Stem Cells ILM6v1.1 (Apr09) transformed` | 22 | No | - | - | 
| Stem cells | `UMCG Progenitor Cells ILM6v1.1 (Apr09) transformed` | 23 | No | - | - | 
| Spleen | `UTHSC Affy MoGene 1.0 ST Spleen (Dec10) RMA` | 79 | Yes | 4.73 | -0.056 | 
| Liver | `UTHSC BXD Liver RNA-Seq Avg (Oct19) TPM Log2` | 50 | Yes | 13.57 | -0.155 | 
| Heart | `NHLBI BXD All Ages Heart RNA-Seq (Nov20) TMP Log2 **` | 73 | No | - | - |
| Eye | `UTHSC BXD All Ages Eye RNA-Seq (Nov20) TPM Log2 **` | 87 | Yes | 5.58 | 0.085 
| Lung | `HZI Lung M430v2 (Apr08) RMA` | 47 | Yes | 14.52 | -0.335 | 

Table: Presence of absence of eQTLs for *Ogg1* in various tissues identified using GeneNetwork. {#tbl:eqtl-results}

### Evidence of epistasis between germline mutator alleles

We next compared the mutation spectra of BXDs with either *B* or *D* genotypes at the mutator loci on chromosomes 4 and 6. Strikingly, we observed that BXDs with *D* alleles at both mutator loci exhibited even higher C>A germline mutation rates than those with *D* alleles at either locus alone (Figure {@fig:distance-results}C). However, BXDs with *D* alleles at the mutator locus on chromosome 6 alone do not exhibit elevate elevated C>A mutation rates, indicating that the effects of the chromosome 6 mutator locus depend on the presence of a *D* allele at the chromosome 4 locus (Figure {@fig:distance-results}C). This result suggests the existence of epistasis between *D* alleles at the two mutator loci in the BXD.

To explore the effects of the two mutator loci in other inbred laboratory mice, we also compared the germline mutation spectra of Sanger Mouse Genomes Project (MGP) strains. Dumont [@PMID:30753674] previously identified private germline mutations in 29 inbred laboratory strains; these private variants likely represent recent *de novo* germline mutations. Compared to MGP strains with *B* alleles at both mutator loci, those with *D* alleles at both mutator loci exhibit significantly higher C>A germline mutation rates (Figure {@fig:distance-results}D). MGP strains with *D* alleles at both mutator loci may also have higher C>A mutation rates than those with *D* alleles at either locus alone (Figure {@fig:distance-results}D), but given the smaller number of strains with *de novo* germline mutation data, we are unable to confirm the signal of epistasis using the MGP mutation data.  

### The candidate mutator alleles are present in wild mice 

To determine whether the candidate mutator alleles on chromosome 6 were segregating in natural populations of mice, we queried previously published sequencing data generated from 67 wild-derived mice [@PMID:27622383]. These data include three subspecies of *Mus musculus*, as well as the outgroup *Mus spretus*. We found that every *D* allele in *Setmar* or *Ogg1* was segregating in at least one population of *Mus* (Figure {@fig:wild-afs}). Notably the nonsynonymous p.Ala95Thr mutation was present at approximately 25% allele frequency in *Mus musculus domesticus*, and fixed in all other subspecies.

![**Frequency of candidate mutator alleles in wild mice.** We queried a VCF file containing variant calls from 67 wild-derived *Mus* samples for each of the three fixed nonsynonymous differences between C57BL/6J and DBA/2J that were observed in DNA repair genes near the mutator locus on chromosome 6. The species abbreviations are: Ms: *Mus spretus*; Mmd: *Mus musculus domesticus*; Mmc: *Mus musculus castaneus*; Mmm: *Mus musculus musculus*](){#fig:wild-afs width=7in} 
