## Discussion

### Using germline mutation spectra to identify mutator alleles

Germline mutation spectra are a rich source of information about the demographic history of populations, as well as the activity of both exogenous and endogenous sources of mutation throughout time. By analyzing the $3$-mer mutation spectrum in a collection of human genomes, Harris and Pritchard [@PMID:28440220] discovered a "pulse" of TCC>TTC mutation activity in European populations that likely occurred between 15,000 and 2,000 years ago, and perhaps began even earlier [@PMID:34016747]). The mutation spectrum has also evolved rapidly during great ape evolution, potentially attributable to the effects of *trans*-acting mutation rate modifiers [@PMID:33983415].

Within somatic tissues, mutation spectra can be used to uncover the mutational processes active in particular populations of cells [@PMID:23945592]. New computational methods have been developed to extract "mutational signatures" from large databases of somatic mutations in cancer [@PMID:36388765]. These signatures, which describe the relative frequency of each $3$-mer mutation type, can often be precisely attributed to loss-of-function mutations in genes encoding DNA repair or replication proteins, chemotherapeutic agents, or exposures to environmental mutagens [@PMID:23945592;@PMID:31740835;@PMID:27811275]. 

Although we would expect a germline mutator allele to increase the absolute count of mutations on a haplotype, its effects may be more easily detectable by examining mutation *spectra* instead. For example, *D* alleles at the locus on chromosome 6 augment the C>A mutation rate by a factor of approximately 1.2 (Figure {@fig:distance-results}). Since C>A mutations comprise about 10% of all germline mutations to begin with, *D* alleles only increase the overall germline mutation rate by around 2%. Our results demonstrate that by examining mutation spectra rather than total mutation counts, we can detect germline mutator alleles with greater power. Given the depth of information that can be encoded in the mutation spectrum, we expect that these spectra can be further exploited to discover genetic modifiers of the mutation rate in other organisms, as well. 

### Epistasis between germline mutator alleles

Our results also reveal evidence of epistasis between mammalian germline mutator alleles for the first time. BXDs with *D* alleles at the mutator locus on chromosome 6 only exhibit elevated C>A mutation rates if they also carry *D* alleles at the previously-identified [@PMID:35545679] mutator locus on chromosome 4. However, BXDs with *D* alleles at both loci have significantly higher C>A germline mutation rates than lines with *D* alleles at only one mutator locus alone (Figure {@fig:distance-results}C). This raises the exciting possibility that epistasis between mutator alleles has contributed to the evolution of germline mutation rates and spectra in mammalian genomes.

Importantly, we observed epistasis between germline mutator alleles in an unnatural population; the BXDs were inbred by brother-sister mating in a highly controlled laboratory environment that attenuated the effects of natural selection on all but the most deleterious alleles. When we queried wild mouse genomes for for the three nonsynonymous DNA repair mutations overlapping the chromosome 6 mutator locus, we found all three at high frequency in *Mus mus domesticus*, the strain from which C57BL/6J and DBA/2J derive most of their genomes. Since the *D* mutator haplotype on chromosome 6 does not appear to increase the C>A germline mutation rate on its own (even in a homozygous state), we hypothesize that similar alleles may be at intermediate or high frequency in other natural populations.

### Applications of inter-haplotype distance to other systems

What conditions must be met in order to detect a germline mutator allele in a particular dataset? Presumably, one must have access to many haplotypes, each with a reasonably large number of *de novo* germline mutations that remain linked to the mutator allele that caused them. Given the rapidly decreasing cost of whole-genome sequencing, these kinds of datasets are becoming much more common. For example, thousands of two- and three-generation human pedigrees have been sequenced in order to identify *de novo* germline mutations. If a mutator allele were active in one or both parental genome, the mutator and many of its constituent mutations would be transmitted to the next generation. Perhaps the biggest challenge to mutator allele discovery in natural populations, however, is the effect of selection on a mutator. 



