## Supplementary information

### Chi-square statistics as an alternative to cosine distance in the inter-haplotype distance method 

Although the current implementation of inter-haplotype distance (IHD) uses the cosine distance metric to compare aggregate mutation spectra at biallelic markers, we also explored the use of chi-square statistics to compare spectra.

As described in the *Materials and Methods*, we compute aggregate mutation spectra on haplotypes that inherited either parental allele at each biallelic marker.
Rather than compute the cosine distance between those spectra, we can create a contingency table of size $(2, \ 6 \times 4^{k - 1})$ (or size $(2, \ 6 \times 4^{k - 1} + 1)$ if $k = 1$ and we're including CpG>TpG) that contains the aggregate $k$-mer mutation spectrum on haplotypes that inherited either parental allele. 
Using the contingency table, we then calculate a $\chi^{2}$ test statistic; larger values of the $\chi^{2}$ statistic suggest more "distance" between the aggregate mutation spectra on the two haplotypes.

We discovered the BXD mutator loci on chromosome 4 and 6 using either cosine distances or chi-square statistics to compare mutation spectra; however, using simulated data we found that the cosine distance metric was more sensitive for mutator allele detection across a broad range of parameter choices (Figure @fig:cosine_vs_chisquare).  

### Missense mutations in *Setmar* are unlikely to contribute to epistasis in the BXDs

Unlike *Ogg1* and *Mbd4*, *Setmar* does not participate directly in base-excision repair, though its primate ortholog plays an indirect role in the repair of double-stranded DNA breaks via non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). 
In anthropoid primates, *SETMAR* encodes a fusion of two functional domains: a SET domain-containing histone methyltransferase and a tranposase domain from the *Mariner* family (MAR) [@PMID:16672366]; the mouse ortholog of *Setmar* only encodes the histone methyltransferase domain.
In human cell lines, *SETMAR* localizes to induced double-strand breaks (DSBs) and dimethylates nearby H3K36, which promotes the recruitment of DNA repair components involved in NHEJ to the DSB [@PMID:21187428].
There is also evidence that overexpression of *SETMAR* (also known as *Metnase*) improves the efficiency of NHEJ [@PMID:16332963] and leads to increased cell survival following exposure to ionizing radiation [@PMID:16332963].
Point mutations in either the SET or MAR domains significantly reduced the ability of *SETMAR* to promote non-homologous end joining and DNA repair [@PMID:16332963;@PMID:24573677;@PMID:21491884], suggesting that both domains are required for its role in DNA repair.
Another study found that overexpression of the isolated SET and MAR domains, but not of wild-type *SETMAR*, had a modest effect on NHEJ repair; overexpression of the SET domain slightly *decreased* NHEJ repair of a linearized plasmid in human cells, while overexpression of the *Mariner*-derived domain increased NHEJ relative to controls [@PMID:31238295].

Taken together, these results suggest that the SET and transposase domains of primate *SETMAR* may have distinct roles in promoting NHEJ, and that both may be required for *SETMAR*-mediated DNA repair. 
The p.Leu103Phe missense mutation that differentiates C57BL/6J and DBA/2J (Table @tbl:nonsyn-diffs) resides within the *Setmar* pre-SET domain and occurs at amino acid residue that is predicted to be deleterious by SIFT [@PMID:12824425].
However, since the mouse *Setmar* ortholog lacks the *Mariner*-derived domain, we believe that the the p.Leu103Phe or p.Ser273Arg missense mutations are unlikely to affect C>A mutation rates in the BXDs. 
Moreoever, we believe that the documented mutator phenotypes associated with both *Ogg1* and *Mbd4*, as well as those genes' known roles in base-excision repair, make them more likely candidates to underlie the epistatic interaction with *Mutyh* we observed in this study.

### Supplementary Figures

![
**Simulations to assess the power of the inter-haplotype distance method.** 
In each of 100 trials, we simulated genotypes at 1,000 biallelic loci on a toy population of either 50 or 100 haplotypes as follows.
At every locus on every haplotype, we drew a single floating point value from a uniform distribution $[0, 1)$.
If that value was less than or equal to 0.5, we set the allele to be "A"; otherwise, we set the allele to be "B".
In each trial, we also simulated *de novo* germline mutations on the population of haplotypes, such that at a single locus $g_i$, we augmented the mutation rate of a particular $k$-mer by the specified effect size (an effect size of 1.5 indicates a 50% increase in the mutation rate) on haplotypes carrying "A" alleles.
We then applied the inter-haplotype distance method to these simulated data and asked if the adjusted cosine distance at locus $g_i$ was greater than expected by chance. 
Given a specific combination of parameters, the y-axis denotes the fraction of 100 trials in which the simulated mutator allele could be detected at a significance threshold of p = 0.05.
Shaded areas indicate the standard deviation of that fraction across 100 simulations.
](images/fig-power-simulations.png){#fig:simulations tag="1-figure supplement 1" width=8.5in} 

![
**Comparing power between the inter-haplotype distance method and QTL mapping.** 
In each of 100 trials, we simulated genotypes at 1,000 biallelic loci on a toy population of 50 haplotypes as follows.
At every locus on every haplotype, we drew a single floating point value from a uniform distribution $[0, 1)$.
If that value was less than or equal to 0.5, we set the allele to be "A"; otherwise, we set the allele to be "B".
In each trial, we also simulated *de novo* germline mutations on the population of haplotypes, such that at a single locus $g_i$, we augmented the rate of the specified mutation type by the specified effect size (an effect size of 1.5 indicates a 50% increase in the mutation rate) on haplotypes carrying "A" alleles.
We then applied the inter-haplotype distance method to these simulated data and asked if the adjusted cosine distance at locus $g_i$ was greater than expected by chance. 
Similarly, in each trial, we used R/qtl2 to perform a genome scan for QTL and asked if the log-odds score at $g_i$ was greater than expected by chance.
Given a specific combination of parameters, the y-axis denotes the fraction of 100 trials in which the simulated mutator allele could be detected at a significance threshold of p = 0.05 (for IHD) or at an alpha of $\frac{0.05}{7}$ (for QTL mapping).
Shaded areas indicate the standard deviation of that fraction across 100 simulations.
](images/fig-power-comparison.png){#fig:ihd_vs_qtl_power tag="1-figure supplement 2" width=8.5in} 

![
**Comparing the power of cosine distance and chi-square statistics in the inter-haplotype distance method.** 
In each of 100 trials, we simulated genotypes at 1,000 biallelic loci on a toy population of 50 haplotypes as follows.
At every locus on every haplotype, we drew a single floating point value from a uniform distribution $[0, 1)$.
If that value was less than or equal to 0.5, we set the allele to be "A"; otherwise, we set the allele to be "B".
In each trial, we also simulated *de novo* germline mutations on the population of haplotypes, such that at a single locus $g_i$, we augmented the rate of the specified mutation type by the specified effect size (an effect size of 1.5 indicates a 50% increase in the mutation rate) on haplotypes carrying "A" alleles.
We then applied the inter-haplotype distance method, using either cosine distance or chi-square statistics to compare aggregate mutation spectra at each marker.
In each trial, we asked if the adjusted cosine distance or chi-square statistic at locus $g_i$ was greater than expected by chance. 
Given a specific combination of parameters, the y-axis denotes the fraction of 100 trials in which the simulated mutator allele could be detected at a significance threshold of p = 0.05.
Shaded areas indicate the standard deviation of that fraction across 100 simulations.
](images/fig-distance-method-comparison.png){#fig:cosine_vs_chisquare tag="1-figure supplement 3" width=8.5in} 

![
**Results of inter-haplotype distance scans using BXDs with *B* alleles at the chromosome 4 locus.** 
Adjusted cosine distances between aggregate 1-mer *de novo* mutation spectra on BXD haplotypes with *B* alleles at `rs27509845` (n = 44 haplotypes; 22,645 total mutations) and either *D* or *B* alleles at 7,278 informative markers. 
Cosine distance threshold at p = 0.05 was calculated by performing 10,000 permutations of the BXD haplotype mutation data, and is shown as a dotted grey line.
](images/fig-distance-results-conditioned.png){#fig:distance-results-conditioned tag="2-figure supplement 1" width=8.5in} 

![
**Quantitative trait locus scans for mutation spectrum phenotypes.**
Using the BXDs with D genotypes at `rs27509845` (the marker with the highest cosine distance on chromosome 4; n = 66 BXDs, 42,171 total mutations), we used R/qtl2 to perform QTL scans for the fractions of each 1-mer mutation type.
QTL scans also included a kinship matrix (that contained the pairwise genetic similarity between each pair of BXDs, calculated using the leave-one-chromosome-out method) as a random effect term using the `kinship` keyword argument in the `scan1` function.
Plots show the log-odds (LOD) score at every genotyped marker in blue; the dotted black line represents the genome-wide LOD significance threshold (established using 1,000 permutations at an alpha of $\frac{0.05}{7}$ to account for the fact that 7 separate association tests were performed.)
](images/fig-qtl-scans.png){#fig:qtl-scans tag="2-figure supplement 2" width=8.5in} 

![
**Mutation spectra comparison in BXD strains.**
Fractions of *de novo* germline mutations in BXDs with either *D* or *B* genotypes at markers `rs27509845` and `rs46276051`, stratified by mutation type.
](images/fig-spectra-comparison-bxd-all.png){#fig:spectra-comparison-all tag="3-figure supplement 1" width=8.5in}

![
**Mutation spectra comparison in Sanger Mouse Genomes Project strains.**
Fractions of *de novo* germline mutations in Sanger MGP strains with either *D* or *B* haplotypes at the chromosome 4 and chromosome 6 mutator loci, stratified by mutation type.
](images/fig-spectra-comparison-mgp.png){#fig:spectra-comparison-mgp tag="3—figure supplement 2" width=8.5in} 

![
**Frequency of nonsynonymous DNA repair mutations in wild mice.** Alternate allele frequencies of each nonsynonymous DNA repair mutation overlapping the chromosome 6 mutator locus were calculated in populations of wild-derived mice from Harr et al. [@PMID:27622383]. Numbers of mice in each subpopulation are shown in parentheses. *Mmc* (*Mus musculus castaneus*), *Mmd* (*Mus musculus domesticus*), *Mmm* (*Mus musculus musculus*), and *Ms* (*Mus spretus*). The *Mbd4* p.Asp129Asn mutation was not observed in any wild populations.
](images/fig-wild-afs.png){#fig:wild-afs tag="3-figure supplement 3" width=8.5in}


### Supplementary Tables

| Gene name | Tissue name | # BXDs with expression data |  Top significant marker | LRS at top significant marker | Additive effect of D allele on expression |
| - | - | - | - | - | - |
| *Setmar* | Kidney | 53 | - | - | - |
| *Setmar* | Gastrointestinal | 46 | - | - | - |
| *Setmar* | Hematopoetic stem cells | 22 | - | - | - | 
| *Setmar* | Hematopoetic progenitor cells | 23 | - | - | - | 
| *Setmar* | Spleen | 79 | - | - | - | 
| *Setmar* | Liver | 50 | - | - | - | 
| *Setmar* | Heart | 73 | - | - | - |
| *Setmar* | Eye | 87 | `rsm10000004172` | 56.0 | 0.151 |  
| *Ogg1* | Kidney | 53 | `rsm10000004188` | 52.25 | -0.186 |
| *Ogg1* | Gastrointestinal | 46 | `rsm10000003441` | 23.39 |  -0.074 |
| *Ogg1* | Hematopoetic stem cells | 22 | - | - |  - | 
| *Ogg1* | Hematopoetic progenitor cells | 23 | - | - |  - | 
| *Ogg1* | Spleen | 79 | - | - |  - | 
| *Ogg1* | Liver | 50 | `rsm10000004188` | 53.54 | -0.156 | 
| *Ogg1* | Heart | 73 | - | - | - |
| *Ogg1* | Eye | 87 | `rsm10000004194` | 23.05 | 0.088 |  
| *Mbd4* | Kidney | 53 | - | - |  - |
| *Mbd4* | Gastrointestinal | 46 | - | - | - |
| *Mbd4* | Hematopoetic stem cells | 22 | - | - | - | 
| *Mbd4* | Hematopoetic progenitor cells | 23 | - | - |  - | 
| *Mbd4* | Spleen | 79 | `rsm10000004199` | 21.42 | 0.069 | 
| *Mbd4* | Liver | 50 | - | - | - | 
| *Mbd4* |Heart | 73 | - | - | - |
| *Mbd4* | Eye | 87 | - | - | - |  
| *Fancd2* | Kidney | 53 | - | - | - | 
| *Fancd2* | Gastrointestinal | 46 | `rsm10000004199` | 35.61 | 0.136 | 
| *Fancd2* | Hematopoetic stem cells | 22 | - | - | - | 
| *Fancd2* | Hematopoetic progenitor cells | 23 | - | - | - | 
| *Fancd2* | Spleen | 79 | - | - | - | 
| *Fancd2* | Liver | 50 | - | - | - | 
| *Fancd2* | Heart | 73 | - | - | - | 
| *Fancd2* | Eye | 87 | - | 17.79 | -0.083 |  
| *Rad18* | Kidney | 53 | - | - | - | 
| *Rad18* | Gastrointestinal | 46 | - | - | - | 
| *Rad18* | Hematopoetic stem cells | 22 | - | - | - | 
| *Rad18* | Hematopoetic progenitor cells | 23 | - | - | - | 
| *Rad18* | Spleen | 79 | - | - | - | 
| *Rad18* | Liver | 50 | - | - | - | 
| *Rad18* | Heart | 73 | - | - | - | 
| *Rad18* | Eye | 87 | `rs252954368` | 49.41 | -0.131 |  

Table: Presence or absence of cis-eQTLs for *Ogg1* and *Mbd4* in various tissues identified using GeneNetwork. {#tbl:eqtl-results tag="supplement 1"}

| SV start | SV end |  SV type | Gene name(s) | Overlaps exon? |
| - | - | - | - | - |
| 108,437,600 | 108,437,652 | DEL | *Gm35165*, *Itpr1* | Yes | 
| 110,617,754 | 110,618,347 | DEL | *Gm20387* | Yes | 
| 113,110,214 | 113,110,215 | INS | *Setd5* | Yes | 
| 116,217,366 | 116,217,367 | INS | *Gm52873*, *Washc2* | Yes |
| 116,323,201 | 116,323,202 | INS | *Marchf8* | Yes | 
| 116,662,107 | 116,668,530 | DEL | *Tmem72* | Yes | 
| 116,976,917 | 116,976,984 | DEL | *LOC118567448* | Yes | 
| 112,605,594 | 112,605,595 | INS | *Rad18* | No | 
| 112,629,618 | 112,636,619 | DEL | *Rad18* | No | 
| 115,823,860 | 115,824,076 | DEL | *Mbd4* | No |

Table: Large structural variants overlapping protein-coding genes in the mutator locus on chromosome 6 All coordinates are with respect to GRCm39/mm39. {#tbl:sv-overlap tag="supplement 2"}

